# Advanced Shared Memory

1. [Atomic Methods for Coordination](#Coordination)
2. [Timing and Nondeterminism](#Nondeterminism)
3. [Detecting Thread Preparedness](#Detecting)

# <a id="Coordination"></a> Atomic Methods for Coordination

The methods listed here will only work with Int32Array and BigInt64Array instances, and they only make sense when used with SharedArrayBuffer instances.

If you try to use these methods with the wrong type of TypedArray, you’ll get one of these errors:

```js
// Firefox v88
Uncaught TypeError: invalid array type for the operation

// Chrome v90 / Node.js v16
Uncaught TypeError: [object Int8Array] is not an int32 or
BigInt64 typed array.
```

**_Mutex_** itself is short for mutual exclusion, which is when a single thread of execution gets exclusive access to a particular piece of data.

**_Futex_** is built on two basic operations, one being “wait” and the other being “wake.”

### Atomics.wait()

```js
status = Atomics.wait(typedArray, index, value, (timeout = Infinity));
```

This method first checks typedArray to see if the value at index is equal to value. If it is not, the function returns the value not-equal. If the value is equal, it will then freeze the thread for up to timeout milliseconds. If nothing happens during that time, the function returns the value timed-out. On the other hand, if another thread calls Atomics.notify() for that same index within the time period, the function then returns with a value of ok.

### Atomics.notify()

```js
awaken = Atomics.notify(typedArray, index, (count = Infinity));
```

The Atomics.notify()1 method attempts to awaken other threads that have called Atomics.wait() on the same typedArray and at the same index. If any other threads are currently frozen, then they will wake up. Multiple threads can be frozen at the same time, each waiting to be notified. The count value then determines how many of them to awaken. The count value defaults to Infinity, meaning that every thread will be awakened. However, if you have four threads waiting and set the value to three, then all but one of them will be woken up.

### Atomics.waitAsync()

```js
promise = Atomics.waitAsync(typedArray, index, value, (timeout = Infinity));
```

This method is essentially a less-performant, nonblocking version of Atomics.wait() that returns a promise which resolves the status of the wait operation. Due to the loss of performance, it isn’t necessarily as useful for the hotpath of a CPU-heavy algorithm. On the other hand, it can be useful in situations where a lock change is more convenient to signal another thread than to perform message-passing operations via postMessage.

# <a id="Nondeterminism"></a> Timing and Nondeterminism

Threads are woken (Atomics.notify()) up in FIFO (first in, first out) order, meaning the first thread that called Atomics.wait() is the first to be woken up, the second to call is the second to be woken up, and so on. Measuring this can be difficult, however, because log messages printed from different workers aren’t guaranteed to be displayed in the terminal in the true order that they were executed in. Ideally, you should build your application in such a way that it continues to work fine regardless of the order in which threads have been awoken.

[notify-order](../Examples/SharedMemory/Browser/await-notify/)

# <a id="Detecting"></a> Detecting Thread Preparedness

A simple way to do so is to call postMessage() from within the worker threads to post back to the parent thread at some point during the onmessage() handler. This works because once the onmessage() handler has been called the worker thread has finished its initial setup and is now running JavaScript code.

One thing to keep in mind is that calling Atomics.wait() will pause the thread. This means postMessage() can’t be called afterward.

[notify-order](../Examples/SharedMemory/Browser/await-notify-when-ready/)
