# WebAssembly

1. [Atomic Operations in WebAssembly](#Atomic)
2. [Compiling C Programs to WebAssembly with Emscripten](#CompilingC)
3. [Other WebAssembly Compilers](#Other)
4. [AssemblyScript](#AssemblyScript)

WebAssembly (often abbreviated as WASM) is a binary-encoded instruction format that runs on a stack- based virtual machine. It’s designed with security in mind and runs in a sandbox where the only things it has access to are memory and functions provided by the host environment. The main motivation behind having such a thing in browsers and other JavaScript runtimes is to run the parts of your program that are performance-sensitive in an environment where execution can happen much faster than JavaScript. Another goal is to provide a compile target for typically compiled languages like C, C++, and Rust.

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly/Understanding_the_text_format

[add.wat](../Examples/WASM/README.md)

# <a id="Atomic"></a> Atomic Operations in WebAssembly

Let’s go over some of the atomic operation instructions. We won’t go over exact syntax, but this should give you an idea of the kinds of operations available at the instruction level:

- [i32|i64].atomic.[load|load8_u|load16_u|load32_u]

The load family of instructions is equivalent to Atomics.load() in JavaScript. Using one of the suffixed instructions allows you to load smaller numbers of bits, extending the result with zeros.

- [i32|i64].atomic.[store|store8|store16|store32]

The store family of instructions is equivalent to Atomics.store() in JavaScript. Using one of the suffixed instructions wraps the input value to that number of bits and stores those at the index.

- [i32|i64].atomic.[rmw|rmw8|rmw16|rmw32].[add|sub|and|or|xor|xchg|cmpxchg][|_u]

The rmw family of instructions all perform read-modify- write operations, equivalent to add(), sub(), and(), or(), xor(), exchange(), and compareExchange() from the Atomics object in JavaScript, respectively. The operations are suffixed with a \_u when they zero-extend, and rmw can have a suffix corresponding to the number of bits to be read.

The next two operations have a slightly different naming convention:

- memory.atomic.[wait32|wait64]
  These are equivalent to Atomics.wait() in JavaScript,
  suffixed according to the number of bits they operate on.

- memory.atomic.notify
  This is equivalent to Atomics.notify() in JavaScript.

These instructions are enough to perform the same atomic operations in WebAssembly as we can in JavaScript, but there is an additional operation not available in JavaScript:

- atomic.fence
  This instruction takes no arguments and doesn’t return anything. It’s intended to be used by higher-level languages that have ways of guaranteeing ordering of nonatomic accesses to shared memory.

# <a id="CompilingC"></a> Compiling C Programs to WebAssembly with Emscripten

In both Node.js and browsers, Emscripten emulates the system calls used by native code compiled to WebAssembly so that programs written in compiled languages can run without many changes.

```js
docker run --rm -v $(pwd):/src -u $(id -u):$(id -g) \emscripten/emsdk emcc [file.c] -pthread \-s PTHREAD_POOL_SIZE=4 -o [file.js]
```

# <a id="Other"></a> Other WebAssembly Compilers

- Clang/Clang++
  The LLVM C-family compilers can target WebAssembly with the -target wasm32-unknown-unknown or -target wasm64-unknown-unknown options, respectively. This is actually what Emscripten is now based on, in which POSIX threads and atomic operations work as expected. While clang and clang++ support WebAssembly output, the recommended approach is to use Emscripten, to get the full suite of platform support in browsers and Node.js.

- Rust
  The Rust programming language compiler rustc supports WebAssembly output. The Rust website is a great starting point on how to use rustc in this way. To make use of threads, you can use the wasm-bindgen-rayon crate, which provides a parallelism API implemented using web workers.

- AssemblyScript
  The AssemblyScript compiler takes a subset of TypeScript as input, then generates WebAssembly output. While it does not support spawning threads, it does support atomic operations and using SharedArrayBuffers, so as long as you handle the threads themselves on the JavaScript side via web workers or worker_threads, you can make full use of multithreaded programming in AssemblyScript.

# <a id="AssemblyScript"></a> AssemblyScript

AssemblyScript was designed as a way to produce WebAssembly code with a much more familiar syntax than WAT. A major selling point of AssemblyScript is that many projects use TypeScript already, so adding some AssemblyScript code to take advantage of WebAssembly doesn’t require as much of a context-switch or even learning an entirely different programming language.

Here is a basic TypeScript module that performs addition:

```ts
export function add(a: number, b: number): number {
  return a + b;
}
```

AssemblyScript looks much the same, except instead of using JavaScript’s number type, there are built-in types for each of the WebAssembly types.

```ts
export function add(a: i32, b: i32): i32 {
  return a + b;
}
```

[Actors](../Examples/WASM/README.md)

AssemblyScript doesn’t provide the ability to spawn threads, but threads can be spawned in the JavaScript environment, and SharedArrayBuffers can be used for the WebAssembly memory.
