#

1. [Some me examples When Not to Use](#Not)
2. [Some examples When to Use](#WhentoUse)

# <a id="Not"></a> Some examples When Not to Use

## The KISS principle, meaning “Keep It Simple, Stupid”

## Low Memory Constraints

There is some additional memory overhead incurred when instantiating multiple threads in JavaScript. This is because the browser needs to allocate additional memory for the new JavaScript environment—this includes things like globals and APIs available to your code as well as under-the-hood memory used by the engine itself. This overhead might prove to be minimal in a normal server environment in the case of Node.js or a beefy laptop in the case of browsers.

Of course, the memory overhead is compounded when the threads pull in more modules. If you were to instantiate heavy frameworks and web servers in each thread you may end up adding hundreds of megabytes of memory to your process.

## Low Core Count

Your application will run slower in situations where it has fewer cores. This is especially true if the machine has a single core, and it can also be true if it has two cores. Even if you employ a thread pool in your application and scale the pool based on the core count, the application will be slower if it creates a single worker thread. When creating an additional thread, the application now has at least two threads (the main and the worker), and the two threads will compete with each other for attention.

# <a id="WhentoUse"></a> Some examples When to Use

## Embarrassingly parallel

    This is a class of problems where a large task can be broken down into smaller tasks and very little or no sharing of state is required.

## Heavy math

    Another characteristic of problems that are a good fit for threads are those that involve a heavy use of math, aka CPU-intensive work.

## Graphics processing

    A lot of graphics processing tasks also benefit from multiple threads.
