# What's the Scope

1. [Compiled vs. Interpreted](#compiledVSInterpreted)
2. [Compiling Code](#compilingCode)
3. [Compiler Speak](#compilingSpeak)
4. [Cheating: Runtime Scope Modifications](#runtimeScopeModifications)
5. [Lexical Scope](#lexicalScope)

## <a id="compiledVSInterpreted"></a> Compiled vs. Interpreted

- Code compilation is a set of steps that process the text of your code and turn it into a list of instructions the computer can understand.

- Interpretation performs a similar task to compilation, in that it transforms your program into machine-understandable instructions.

- Unlike a program being compiled all at once, with interpretation the source code is transformed line by line; each line or statement is executed before immediately proceeding to processing the next line of the source code.

## <a id="compilingCode"></a> Compiling Code

- Scope is primarily determined during compilation.

In classic compiler theory, a program is processed by a compiler in three basic stages:

1. Tokenizing/Lexing: breaking up a string of characters into meaningful (to the language) chunks, called tokens.
2. Parsing: taking a stream (array) of tokens and turning it into a tree of nested elements, which collectively represent the grammatical structure of the program. Abstract Syntax Tree (AST)
3. Code Generation: taking an AST and turning it into executable code.

- The JS engine is vastly more complex than just these three stages. JS engines don’t have the luxury of an abundance of time to perform their work and optimizations so the engines use all kinds of tricks (like JITs, which lazy compile and even hot re- compile);

**Required: Two Phases**

- Processing of JS programs is that it occurs in (at least) two phases: parsing/compilation first, then execution.

**Syntax Errors from the Start**

First consideration:

```
var greeting = "Hello";
console.log(greeting);
greeting = ."Hi";
// SyntaxError: unexpected token .
```

If JS was executing top-down line by line, one would expect the "Hello" message being printed before the syntax error being thrown. That doesn’t happen because the JS engine first parsing the entire program before any of it is executed.

Second consideration:

```
console.log("Howdy");
saySomething("Hello","Hi");
// Uncaught SyntaxError: Duplicate parameter name not
// allowed in this context
function saySomething(greeting,greeting) {
    "use strict";
    console.log(greeting);
}
```

Just like the snippet in the previous section, the SyntaxError here is thrown before the program is executed. In this case, it’s because strict-mode (opted in for only the saySomething(..) function here) forbids, among many other things, functions to have duplicate parameter names;

**Hosting**

Third consideration:

```
function saySomething() {
    var greeting = "Hello";
    {
        greeting = "Howdy"; // error comes from here let greeting = "Hi";
        console.log(greeting);
    }
}

saySomething();
// ReferenceError: Cannot access 'greeting' before
// initialization
```

What’s happening is that the greeting variable for that statement belongs to the declaration on the next line, let greeting = "Hi", rather than to the previous var greeting = "Hello" statement.

This processing of scopes and declarations can only accurately be accomplished by parsing the program before execution.

## <a id="compilingSpeak"></a> Compiler Speak

With awareness of the two-phase processing of a JS program (compile, then execute), let’s turn our attention to how the JS engine identifies variables and determines the scopes of a program as it is compiled.

For the JS engine to properly handle a program’s variables, it must first label each occurrence of a variable as target or source.

How do you know if a variable is a target? Check if there is a value that is being assigned to it; if so, it’s a target. If not, then the variable is a source.

Example code to analyze:

```
var students = [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle" },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy" },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank" },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah" }
];

function getStudentName(studentID) {
    for (let student of students) {
        if (student.id == studentID) {
            return student.name;
        }
    }
}

var nextStudent = getStudentName(73);

console.log(nextStudent);
// Suzy
```

**Target**

- Clearly an assignment operations:

```
students = [ // ..
```

```
nextStudent = getStudentName(73)
```

- Less obvious assignment operations:

```
// assigns a value to student for each iteration of the loop
 for (let student of students) {
```

```
// argument 73 is assigned to the parameter studentID
getStudentName(73)
```

- Last (subtle) target reference **“function hoisting”**

```
function getStudentName(studentID) {
```

You can think of it sort of like var getStudentName = function(studentID), but that’s not exactly accurate.
The association between getStudentName and the function is automatically set up at the beginning of the scope rather than waiting for an = assignment statement to be executed.

**Sources**

```
//students is a source reference
    for (let student of students)
```

```
//both student and studentID are source
    if (student.id == studentID)
```

```
//getStudentName is a source reference
nextStudent = getStudentName(73)
```

```
//both console and nextStudent are source
console.log(nextStudent)
```

## <a id="runtimeScopeModifications"></a> Cheating: Runtime Scope Modifications

- Scope is determined as the program is compiled, and should not generally be affected by runtime conditions.
- However, in non-strict-mode, there are technically still two ways to cheat this rule.

  #### (At all costs, avoid eval(..) (at least, eval(..) creating declarations) and with keyword.)

**First Way eval(...)**

The eval(..) function receives a string of code to compile and execute on the fly during the program runtime.

```
function badIdea() {
    eval("var oops = 'Ugh!';");
    console.log(oops);
}
badIdea();   // Ugh!
```

If the eval(..) had not been present, the oops variable in console.log(oops) would not exist, and would throw a ReferenceError. eval(..) is making modifications of the scope of the badIdea() function at runtime.

**Second Way with keyword**

The with keyword, essentially dynamically turns an object into a local scope—its properties are treated as identifiers in that new scope’s block

```
var badIdea = { oops: "Ugh!" };
with (badIdea) {
    console.log(oops); // Ugh!
}
```

The global scope was not modified here, but badIdea was turned into a scope at runtime rather than compile time, and its property oops becomes a variable in that scope.

## <a id="lexicalScope"></a> Lexical Scope

- JS’s scope is determined at compile time; the term for this kind of scope is “lexical scope”.
- The key idea of “lexical scope” is that it’s controlled entirely by the placement of functions, blocks, and variable declarations, in relation to one another.
- If the variable is not declared in the current scope, the next outer/enclosing scope will be consulted, either a matching variable declaration can be found, or the global scope is reached and there’s nowhere else to go.
- While scopes are identified during compilation, they’re not actually created until runtime, each time a scope needs to run.
