# What's the Scope

1. [Marbles, and Buckets, and Bubbles... Oh My!](#marbles)
2. [A Conversation Among Friends](#friends)
3. [Nested Scope](#nestedScope)

## <a id="marbles"></a> Marbles, and Buckets, and Bubbles... Oh My!

- Metaphor of the marbles and buckets.
- Marbles represent the variables in our program, all they are different colors this helps to know where are we will dropping them, (red ones in the red bucket, blue ones in the blue bucket....)
- The buckets are the scopes (functions and blocks).
- The color of each marble is thus determined by which color scope we find the marble originally created in.

Example code to analyze:

```
// outer/global scope: RED

var students = [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle" },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy" },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank" },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah" }
];

function getStudentName(studentID) {
    // function scope: BLUE
    for (let student of students) {
        // loop scope: GREEN

        if (student.id == studentID) {
            return student.name;
        }
    }
}

var nextStudent = getStudentName(73);

console.log(nextStudent);
// Suzy
```

1. Buckets 1 (RED) encompasses the global scope, which holds three identifiers/variables: students, get- StudentName, and nextStudent.
2. Buckets 2 (BLUE) encompasses the scope of the function getStudentName(..), which holds just one identifier/variable: the parameter studentID.
3. Buckets 3 (GREEN) encompasses the scope of the for- loop, which holds just one identifier/variable: student.

As the JS engine processes a program (during compilation), and finds a declaration for a variable, it essentially asks, “Which color scope (bucket) am I currently in?” The variable is designated as that same color, meaning it belongs to that bucket.

## <a id="friends"></a> A Conversation Among Friends

Another metaphor for the process of analyzing variables and the scopes they come from is to imagine various conversations that occur inside the engine as code is processed and then executed.

- Engine: responsible for start-to-finish compilation and execution of our JavaScript program.
- Compiler: one of Engine’s friends; handles all the dirty work of parsing and code-generation.
- Scope Manager: another friend of Engine; collects and maintains a lookup list of all the declared variables/identifiers, and enforces a set of rules as to how these are accessible to currently executing code.

Compilation for the program might play out between Compiler and Scope Manager

Example of Conversation pattern:

**Compiler** found a formal declaration for an identifier --> ask if already exists to --> **Scope Manager**

**Scope Manager** --> look fot the identifier

**Scope Manager** --> if don't found created it and inform to --> **Compiler**

**Compiler** found a formal declaration for an function --> ask to create a new scope to --> **Scope Manager**

**Scope Manager** --> create new scope and inform to --> **Compiler**

**Compiler** found a formal parameter declaration in the function --> ask for validation to --> **Scope Manager (of the function)**

...

Execution of the program, the conversation will shift to Engine and Scope Manager

Example of Conversation pattern:

**Engine** found a identifier of a function --> ask if the identifier was declared to --> **Scope Manager**

**Scope Manager** --> inform that the identifier was formally declared for the scope to --> **Engine**

**Engine** assign the function to the identifier

**Engine** found a target references --> ask if the variable was declared to --> **Scope Manager**

**Scope Manager** --> inform that the variable was formally declared for the scope to --> **Engine**

**Engine** Initializing the variable to undefined, so its ready to use

**Engine** found a source reference for a function --> ask if its exists to --> **Scope Manager**

**Scope Manager** --> inform that the identifier was formally declared for the scope to --> **Engine**

**Engine** execute the function --> ask to instantiate the function's scope to --> **Scope Manager**

...

To review and summarize how a statement like **var students = [ .. ]** is processed, in two distinct steps:

1. Compiler sets up the declaration of the scope variable (since it wasn’t previously declared in the current scope).
2. While Engine is executing, to process the assignment part of the statement, Engine asks Scope Manager to look up the variable, initializes it to undefined so it’s ready to use, and then assigns the array value to it.

## <a id="nestedScope"></a> Nested Scope

At the beginning of a scope, if any identifier came from a function declaration, that variable is automatically initialized to its associated function reference. And if any identifier came from a var declaration (as opposed to let/const), that variable is automatically initialized to undefined so that it can be used; otherwise, the variable remains uninitialized (aka, in its “TDZ,”) and cannot be used until its full declaration-and-initialization are executed.

Example code to analyze:

```
// outer/global scope: RED

var students = [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle" },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy" },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank" },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah" }
];

function getStudentName(studentID) {
    // function scope: BLUE
    for (let student of students) {
        // loop scope: GREEN

        if (student.id == studentID) {
            return student.name;
        }
    }
}

var nextStudent = getStudentName(73);

console.log(nextStudent);
// Suzy
```

In the for (let student of students) { statement, students is a source reference that must be looked up.

Example of Conversation pattern:

**Engine** found source reference for students --> ask for validation to --> **Scope Manager (of the function)**

**Scope Manager (of the function)** don't found it --> inform to try in outer scope to --> **Engine**

**Engine** found source reference for students --> ask for validation to --> **Scope Manager (global scope)**

**Scope Manager (of the function)** found it --> inform that the identifier was formally declared for the scope to --> **Engine**

...

#### Lookup Failures

When Engine exhausts all lexically available scopes (moving outward) and still cannot resolve the lookup of an identifier, an error condition then exists.

- Depending on the mode of the program (strict-mode or not) and the role of the variable (target vs. source), this error condition will be handled differently.

- If the variable is a source, an unresolved identifier lookup is considered an undeclared (unknown, missing) variable, which always results in a **ReferenceError** being thrown.

- Also, if the variable is a target, and the code at that moment is running in **strict-mode**, the variable is considered undeclared and similarly throws a **ReferenceError**.

**not defined vs undefined**

- “Not defined” really means “not declared” as in a variable that has no matching formal declaration in any lexically available scope.

- “Undefined” really means a variable was found (declared), but the variable otherwise has no other value in it at the moment, so it defaults to the undefined value.

- typeof operator returns the string "undefined" for variable references in either state:

```
var studentName;
typeof studentName; // "undefined"

typeof doesntExist; // "undefined" look out!!
```

**Accidental global variable**

only in not **strict-mode**

```
function getStudentName() {
    // assignment to an undeclared variable :(
     nextStudent = "Suzy";
}
getStudentName();
console.log(nextStudent);
// "Suzy" -- oops, an accidental-global variable!
```

Example of Conversation pattern:

**Engine** found target reference for nextStudent --> ask for validation to --> **Scope Manager (of the function)**

**Scope Manager (of the function)** don't found it --> inform to try in outer scope to --> **Engine**

**Engine** found target reference for nextStudent --> ask for validation to --> **Scope Manager (global scope)**

**Scope Manager (of the function)** don't found it --> inform that the identifier was **not** formally declared for the scope but scope created a global variable in that moment --> **Engine**

This sort of accident is a great example of the beneficial protections offered by **strict-mode**, and why it’s such a bad idea not to be using **strict-mode**.
