# The Scope Chain

1. [“Lookup” Is (Mostly) Conceptual](#lookup)
2. [Shadowing](#shadowing)
3. [Function Name Scope](#functionNameScope)
4. [Arrow Functions](#arrowFunctions)
5. [Backing Out](#backingOut)

The connections between scopes that are nested within other scopes is called the scope chain, which determines the path along which variables can be accessed. The chain is directed, meaning the lookup moves upward/outward only.

[Example files...](../Examples/Shadowing/)

## <a id="lookup"></a> “Lookup” Is (Mostly) Conceptual

The scope of where a variable is declarer _usually is determined_ during the initial compilation processing. Because lexical scope is pretty much finalized at that point, the variable scope will not change based on anything that can happen later during runtime.

When a variable is not declarer in a file is no necessarily an error, maybe another file in the runtime may indeed declare that variable in the shared global scope.

So in that case the variable is initially undeclared and (with out scope) during that file compilation, the scope of the variable can be determined until other files have been compiled and the application runtime commences, then deferred lookup will eventually resolve the scope of the variable (likely the global scope).

This lookup only be needed once per variable in the application runtime.

## <a id="shadowing"></a> Shadowing

Example code to analyze:

```
var studentName = "Suzy";

function printStudent(studentName) {
    studentName = studentName.toUpperCase();
    console.log(studentName);
}
printStudent("Frank");
// FRANK
printStudent(studentName);
// SUZY
console.log(studentName);
// Suzy
```

In the example we have the variable **studentName** in the **global scope** but at the same time is an other variable **studentName** in a **function scope** as a parameter of the function printStudent, so all the code inside that **function scope** will reference the declaration of the variable **studentName** as the parameter and not the **studentName** in the **global scope**, that means that the code inside of **function scope** will use the variable **studentName** of the **function scope**. So our parameter of the function printStudent **studentName** is shadowing the variable **studentName** of the **global scope**.

In the global scope, **var** declarations and **function** declarations also expose themselves as properties (of the same name as the identifier) on the global object (for a browser environment, you probably recognize the global object as **window**), so you can use window.studentName as a mirror of the **studentName** in the **global scope** in other scopes.

#### Illegal Shadowing

let can shadow var, but var cannot shadow let:

```
function something() {
    var special = "JavaScript";
    {
        let special = 42; // totally fine shadowing
    // ..
    }
}

function another(){
    let special = "JavaScript";
    {
        var special = "JavaScript";
        // ^^^ Syntax Error
    // ..
    }
}

function another()  // ..
{
    let special = "JavaScript";
    ajax("https://some.url",function callback(){
        // totally fine shadowing
        var special = "JavaScript";
        // ..
    });
}
```

Summary: let (in an inner scope) can always shadow an outer scope’s var. var (in an inner scope) can only shadow an outer scope’s let if there is a function boundary in between.

## <a id="functionNameScope"></a> Function Name Scope

```
// function declaration looks like this
function askQuestion() { // ..
}

// anonymous function expression looks like this
var askQuestion = function(){ // ..
};
```

One major difference between function declarations and function expressions is what happens to the name identifier of the function. Consider a named function expression:

```
var askQuestion = function ofTheTeacher() {
    console.log(ofTheTeacher);
};
askQuestion();
// function ofTheTeacher()...
console.log(ofTheTeacher);
// ReferenceError: ofTheTeacher is not defined
```

- askQuestion ends up in the outer scope
- ofTheTeacher inside the function itself
- ofTheTeacher it’s also defined as read-only

## <a id="arrowFunctions"></a> Arrow Functions

ES6 added an additional function expression form to the language, called “arrow functions”

```
var askQuestion = () => { // ..
};
```

- The => arrow function doesn’t require the word function
- The ( .. ) around the parameter list is optional in some simple cases.
- The { .. } around the function body is optional in some cases.
  - when the { .. } are omitted, a return value is sent out without using a return keyword.
  - An arrow function, with or without { .. } around its body, still creates a separate, inner nested bucket of scope.

Just a few, for example:

```
() => 42;

id => id.toUpperCase();

(id,name) => ({ id, name });

(...args) => {
    return args[args.length - 1];
};
```

## <a id="backingOut"></a> Backing Out

When a function (declaration or expression) is defined, a new scope is created. The positioning of scopes nested inside one another creates a natural scope hierarchy throughout the program, called the scope chain. The scope chain controls variable access, directionally oriented upward and outward.
