# Around the Global Scope

1. [Why Global Scope?](#why)
2. [Where Exactly is this Global Scope?](#where)
3. [Global This](#this)

## <a id="why"></a> Why Global Scope?

It’s likely no surprise to readers that most applications are composed of multiple (sometimes many!) individual JS files. So how exactly do all those separate files get stitched together in a single runtime context by the JS engine?

- ES modules: The separate module files cooperate with each other exclusively through these shared imports, without needing any shared outer scope.

- Using a bundler in your build process: All the files are typically concatenated together before delivery to the browser and JS engine, some mechanism is necessary for each piece to register a name to be referred to by other pieces
  - In some build setups, the entire contents of the file are wrapped in a single enclosing scope, such as a wrapper function.

```
(function wrappingOuterScope(){
    var moduleOne = (function one(){
        // ..
    })();
    var moduleTwo = (function two(){
        // ..
        function callModuleOne() {
            moduleOne.someMethod();
        }
    // ..
    })();
})();
```

- Bundler tool is used for an application, or whether the (non-ES module) files are simply loaded in the browser individually if there is no single surrounding scope encompassing all these pieces, the global scope is the only way for them to cooperate with each other

module1.js:

```
var moduleOne = (function one(){
    // ..
})();
```

module2.js:

```
var moduleTwo = (function two(){
    // ..
    function callModuleOne() { moduleOne.someMethod(); }
    // ..
})();
```

If these files are loaded separately as normal standalone .js files in a browser environment, each top-level variable declaration will end up as a global variable, since the global scope is the only shared resource between these two separate files

In addition to (potentially) accounting for where an applica- tion’s code resides during runtime, and how each piece is able to access the other pieces to cooperate, the global scope is also where:

- JS exposes its built-ins:
  - primitives:undefined,null,Infinity,NaN – natives:Date(),Object(),String(),etc.
  - global functions: eval(), parseInt(), etc. – namespaces:Math,Atomics,JSON
  - friends of JS: Intl, WebAssembly
- The environment hosting the JS engine exposes its own built-ins:
  - console (and its methods)
  - the DOM (window, document, etc)
  - timers (setTimeout(..), etc)
  - web platform APIs: navigator, history, geolocation, WebRTC, etc.

## <a id="where"></a> Where Exactly is this Global Scope?

Different JS environments handle the scopes of your programs, especially the global scope, differently. It’s quite common for JS developers to harbor misconceptions without even realizing it.

#### Browser “Window”

With respect to treatment of the global scope, the most pure environment JS can be run in is as a standalone .js file loaded in a web page environment in a browser.

index.js

```
var studentName = "Kyle";
function hello() {
    console.log(`Hello, ${ studentName }!`);
}

hello(); // Hello, Kyle!
```

Code may be loaded in a web page environment using an **script** tag, a **script src=..** or even a dynamically created **script** tag. In all three cases, the studentName and hello identifiers are declared in the global scope. That means if you access the global object (commonly, window in the browser), you’ll find properties of those same names there.

That behavior depends of the JS environments you are using.

#### Globals Shadowing Globals

An unusual consequence of the difference between a global variable and a global property of the same name is that, within just the global scope itself, a global object property can be shadowed by a global variable:

```
window.something = 42;
let something = "Kyle";
console.log(something);
// Kyle
console.log(window.something);
// 42
```

A simple way to avoid this gotcha with global declarations: always use var for globals. Reserve let and const for block scopes.

#### DOM Globals

One surprising behavior in the global scope you may en- counter with browser-based JS applications: a DOM element with an id attribute automatically creates a global variable that references it

index.html

```
<ul id="my-todo-list">
   <li id="first">Write a book</li>
   ..
</ul>
```

index.js

```
first;
// <li id="first">..</li>
window["my-todo-list"];
// <ul id="my-todo-list">..</ul>
```

The auto-registration of all id-bearing DOM elements as global variables is an old legacy browser behavior that nevertheless must remain because so many old sites still rely on it. My advice is **never to use these global variables, even though they will always be silently created**.

#### What’s in a (Window) Name?

window.name is a pre-defined “global” in a browser context; is actually a pre-defined getter/setter on the window object, which insists on its value being a string value.

#### Web Workers

- Web Workers are a web platform extension on top of browser JS behavior, which allows a JS file to run in a completely separate thread (operating system wise) from the thread that’s running the main JS program.

- Web Worker is treated as a wholly separate program, it does not share the global scope with the main JS program.

- Since there is no DOM access, the window alias for the global scope doesn’t exist.

In a Web Worker, the global object reference is typically made using self:

```
var studentName = "Kyle";
let studentID = 42;
function hello() {
    console.log(`Hello, ${ self.studentName }!`);
}
self.hello(); // Hello, Kyle!
self.studentID; // undefined
```

#### Developer Tools Console/REPL

The take-away is that Developer Tools, while optimized to be convenient and useful for a variety of developer activities, are not suitable environments to determine or verify explicit and nuanced behaviors of an actual JS program context.

#### ES Modules (ESM)

One of the most obvious impacts of using ESM is how it changes the behavior of the observably top-level scope in a file.

index.mjs

```
var studentName = "Kyle";
function hello() {
    console.log(`Hello, ${ studentName }!`);
}

hello(); // Hello, Kyle!

export hello;
```

- **studentName** and **hello** are not global variables. Instead, they are module-wide, or if you prefer, “module-global.”

ESM encourages a minimization of reliance on the global scope, where you import whatever modules you may need for the current module to operate. As such, you less often see usage of the global scope or its global object.

However, as noted earlier, there are still plenty of JS and web globals that you will continue to access from the global scope, whether you realize it or not!

#### Node

Node treats every single .js file that it loads, including the main one you start the Node process with, as a module (ES module or CommonJS module). The practical effect is that the top level of your Node programs is never actually the global scope, the way it is when loading a non-module file in the browser.

CommonJS module

```
var studentName = "Kyle";
function hello() {
    console.log(`Hello, ${ studentName }!`);
}

hello(); // Hello, Kyle!

module.exports.hello = hello;
```

Envision the preceding code as being seen by Node as this (illustrative, not actual):

```
function Module(module,require,__dirname,...) {
    var studentName = "Kyle";
    function hello() {
        console.log(`Hello, ${ studentName }!`);
    }

    hello(); // Hello, Kyle!

    module.exports.hello = hello;
}
```

- You can clearly see here why studentName and hello identifiers are not global, but rather declared in the module scope.

- Things like **require()** actually are no globals, they’re injected in the scope of every module, essentially a bit like the parameters listed in the Module(..) function declaration.

- **global** is a reference to the real global scope object, somewhat like using window in a browser JS environment.

## <a id="this"></a> Global This

- Declare a global variable in the top-level scope with var or function declarations—or let, const, and class.
- Also add global variables declarations as properties of the global scope object if var or function are used for the declaration.
- Refer to the global scope object (for adding or retrieving global variables, as properties) with window, self, or global.

As of ES2020, JS has finally defined a standardized reference to the global scope object, called globalThis. So, subject to the recency of the JS engines your code runs in, you can use globalThis in place of any of those other approaches.
