# The (Not So) Secret Lifecycle of Variables

1. [When Can I Use a Variable?](#variable)
2. [Hoisting: Yet Another Metaphor](#hosting)
3. [Re-declaration?](#reDeclaration)
4. [Uninitialized Variables (aka, TDZ)](#Uninitialized)

## <a id="variable"></a> When Can I Use a Variable?

- The term most commonly used for a variable being visible from the beginning of its enclosing scope, even though its declaration may appear further down in the scope, is called hoisting.

```
greeting(); // Hello!

function greeting() {
    console.log("Hello!");
}
```

- **Function hoisting** When a function declaration’s name identifier is registered at the top of its scope, it’s additionally auto-initialized to that function’s reference. That’s why the function can be called throughout the entire scope!

#### Hoisting: Declaration vs. Expression

- **Function hoisting** only applies to formal function declarations, not to function expression assignments.

```
greeting();// TypeError

var greeting = function greeting() {
    console.log("Hello!");
};
```

- Depending on your JS environment, the error message would say something like, “‘undefined’ is not a function,” or more helpfully, “‘greeting’ is not a function.”

- A function declaration is hoisted and initialized to its function value (again, called function hoisting)

- A var variable is also hoisted, and then auto-initialized to undefined

## <a id="hosting"></a> Hoisting: Yet Another Metaphor

The typical assertion of what hoisting means: lifting—like lifting a heavy weight upward—any identifiers all the way to the top of a scope. The explanation often asserted is that the JS engine will actually rewrite that program before execution:

Example code:

```
greeting = "Hello!";
console.log(greeting);
// Hello!
var greeting = "Howdy!";
```

After hosting looks more like this:

```
var greeting; // hoisted declaration
greeting = "Hello!"; // the original line 1
console.log(greeting); // Hello!
greeting = "Howdy!"; // `var` is gone!
```

- The hoisting (metaphor) proposes that JS pre-processes the original program and re-arranges it a bit, so that all the declarations have been moved to the top of their respective scopes, before execution.

- The hoisting (metaphor) asserts that function declarations are, in their entirety, hoisted to the top of each scope

Example code:

```
studentName = "Suzy";
greeting();
// Hello Suzy!
function greeting() {
    console.log(`Hello ${ studentName }!`);
}
var studentName;
```

After hosting looks more like this:

```
function greeting() {
    console.log(`Hello ${ studentName }!`);
}
var studentName;
studentName = "Suzy";
greeting();
// Hello Suzy!
```

_So if the hoisting metaphor is (at best) inaccurate, what should we do with the term? I think it’s still useful—indeed, even members of TC39 regularly use it!—but I don’t think we should claim it’s an actual re-arrangement of source code._

## <a id="reDeclaration"></a> Re-declaration?

```
var studentName = "Frank";
console.log(studentName); // Frank
var studentName;
console.log(studentName); // ???
```

If you consider this program from the perspective of the hoisting metaphor

```
var studentName;
var studentName; // clearly a pointless no-op!
studentName = "Frank";
console.log(studentName);
// Frank
console.log(studentName);
// Frank
```

- There is **not** such a thing as a variable being “re-declared” in the same scope.

- It’s also important to point out that var studentName; doesn’t mean var studentName = undefined;

```
var studentName = "Frank";
console.log(studentName); // Frank
var studentName;
console.log(studentName); // Frank <--- still!
// let's add the initialization explicitly
var studentName = undefined;
console.log(studentName); // undefined <--- see!?

var greeting;
function greeting() {
    console.log("Hello!");
}
// basically, a no-op
var greeting;
typeof greeting; // "function"
var greeting = "Hello!";
typeof greeting; // "string"
```

- Repeating a declaration within a scope using let or const

```
let studentName = "Frank";
console.log(studentName);
let studentName = "Suzy";
```

- Depending on your JS environment, the error message will indicate something like: “studentName has already been declared.”

“Re-declaration” of variables is seen by some, including many on the TC39 body, as a bad habit that can lead to program bugs. So when ES6 introduced let, they decided to prevent “re- declaration” with an error.

#### Constants

- Like let, const cannot be repeated with the same identifier in the same scope.

- The const keyword requires a variable to be initialized, so omitting an assignment from the declaration results in a SyntaxError

- const declarations create variables that cannot be re-assigned

```
const empty; // SyntaxError: stop program from even starting

const studentName = "Frank";

console.log(studentName); // Frank

studentName = "Suzy"; // TypeError: represent faults that arise during program execution
```

#### Loops

- All the rules of scope are applied per scope instance. In other words, each time a scope is entered during execution, everything resets.

```
var keepGoing = true;

while (keepGoing) {
    let value = Math.random();

    if (value > 0.5) {
        keepGoing = false;
    }
}
```

- **var** is not treated as a block scoping declaration, it attaches itself to the global scope. So there’s just one value variable, in the same scope as keepGoing (global scope, in this case). No “re-declaration” here, either!

```
var keepGoing = true;

while (keepGoing) {
    var value = Math.random();

    if (value > 0.5) {
        keepGoing = false;
    }
}
```

- With for..in and for..of loops: the declared variable is treated as inside the loop body, and thus is handled per iteration (aka, per scope instance).

```
for (let index in students) {
    // this is fine
}
for (let student of students) {
    // so is this
}
for (const index in students) {
    // this is fine
}
for (const student of students) {
    // this is also fine
}
for (let i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
    // this is also fine
}
for (const i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
// oops, this is going to fail with
// a Type Error after the first iteration
}
```

- The problem with the last one is not “re-declaration” the real problem is re-assignment, which isn’t allowed for constants.

## <a id="Uninitialized"></a> Uninitialized Variables (aka, TDZ)

- **var** is is “hoisted” to the top of its scope and automatically initialized to the undefined value.

- **let** and **const** not are automatically initialized to the undefined value.

```
console.log(studentName);
// ReferenceError
//

let studentName = "Suzy";
```

- Depending on your JS environment, the error message may say something like: “Cannot access studentName before initialization.”

- For let/const, the only way to initialization is with an assignment attached to a declaration statement. An assignment by itself is insufficient!

- We cannot use the variable at any point prior to that initialization occurring goes for **const** as it does for **let**.

- The term coined by TC39 to refer to this period of time from the entering of a scope to where the auto-initialization of the variable occurs is: Temporal Dead Zone (TDZ).

- A var also has technically has a TDZ, but it’s zero in length and thus unobservable to our programs! Only let and const have an observable TDZ.

By the way, “temporal” in TDZ does indeed refer to time not position in code. Consider:

```
askQuestion(); // ReferenceError

let studentName = "Suzy";

function askQuestion() {
    console.log(`${ studentName }, do you know?`);
}
```

- The actual difference is that let/const declarations do not automatically initialize at the beginning of the scope, the way var does.

```

var studentName = "Kyle";
{
    console.log(studentName);
    // ReferenceError

    let studentName = "Suzy";
    console.log(studentName);
    // Suzy
}
```

- throws a TDZ error, because in fact, the inner scope’s studentName was hoisted (auto-registered at the top of the scope). What didn’t happen (yet!) was the auto-initialization of that inner studentName; it’s still uninitialized at that moment, hence the TDZ violation!
