# Limiting Scope Exposure

1. [Least Exposure](#exposure)
2. [Hiding in Plain (Function) Scope](#functionScope)
3. [Scoping with Blocks](#scopingBlocks)
4. [Function Declarations in Blocks (FiB)](#FiB)
5. [Blocked Over](#BlockedOver)

## <a id="exposure"></a> Least Exposure

- Software engineering articulates a fundamental discipline, typically applied to software security, called “The Principle of Least Privilege” (POLP). 1 And a variation of this principle that applies to our current discussion is typically labeled as “Least Exposure” (POLE).

When variables used by one part of the program are exposed to another part of the program, via scope, there are three main hazards that often arise:

- Naming Collisions: For example, imagine if all your loops used a single global i index variable, and then it happens that one loop in a function is running during an iteration of a loop from another function, and now the shared i variable gets an unexpected value.

- Unexpected Behavior: For example, if your part of the program assumes an array contains all numbers, but someone else’s code accesses and modifies the array to include booleans and strings, your code may then misbehave in unexpected ways.

- Unintended Dependency: For example, if your code relies on an array of numbers, and you later decide it’s better to use some other data structure instead of an array, you now must take on the liability of adjusting other affected parts of the software.

## <a id="functionScope"></a> Hiding in Plain (Function) Scope

[Example files...](../Examples/HideVariable/)

```
// outer/global scope


var factorial = (function hideTheCache() {
    // "middle scope", where we hide `cache`
    var cache = {};
    function factorial(x) {
        if (x < 2) return 1; if (!(x in cache)) {
            cache[x] = x * factorial(x - 1);
        }
        return cache[x];
    }

    return factorial;
})();

factorial(6);
// 720
factorial(7);
// 5040
```

- Using a function to create the scope for hiding **cache** variable.

- Its persistent cache stays hidden yet accessible only to factorial(..)

- This caching relies on closure

- “Function Name Scope” That means we can name every single occurrence of such a function expression the exact same name, and never have any collision.

- By the line at the end of the function expression that contains })() we’re defining a function expression that’s then immediately invoked.

- The first set of surrounding ( .. ) around the function expression is not strictly necessary, but we used them for readability sake anyway.

#### Invoking Function Expressions Immediately

An Immediately Invoked Function Expression (IIFE) is useful when we want to create a scope to hide variables/functions. Since it’s an expression, it can be used in any place in a JS program where an expression is allowed. An IIFE can be named, as with hideTheCache(), or (much more commonly!) unnamed/anonymous. And it can be standalone or, as before, part of another statement—hideTheCache() returns the factorial() function reference which is then = assigned to the variable factorial.

#### Function Boundaries

If the code you need to wrap a scope around has return, this, break, or continue in it, an IIFE is probably not the best approach. In that case, you might look to create the scope with a block instead of a function.

For example, a return statement in some piece of code would change its meaning if an IIFE is wrapped around it, because now the return would refer to the IIFE’s function. Non-arrow function IIFEs also change the binding of a this keyword. And statements like break and continue won’t operate across an IIFE function boundary to control an outer loop or block.

## <a id="scopingBlocks"></a> Scoping with Blocks

- In general, any { .. } curly-brace pair which is a statement will act as a block, but not necessarily as a scope.

A block only becomes a scope if necessary, to contain its block-scoped declarations (i.e., let or const). Consider:

```
{
// not necessarily a scope (yet)
// ..
// now we know the block needs to be a scope
    let thisIsNowAScope = true;
    for (let i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        // this is also a scope, activated each // iteration
        if (i % 2 == 0) {
        // this is just a block, not a scope console.log(i);
        }
    }
}
// 0 2 4
```

- Object literals use { .. } curly-brace pairs to delimit their key-value lists, but such object values are not scopes.

- class uses { .. } curly-braces around its body definition, but this is not a block or scope.

- A function uses { .. } around its body, but this is not technically a block—it’s a single statement for the function body. It is, however, a (function) scope.

- The { .. } curly-brace pair on a switch statement (around the set of case clauses) does not define a block/scope.

- a { .. } curly-brace pair can define a block attached to a statement (like an if or for), or stand alone by itself—see the outermost { .. } curly brace pair in the previous snippet

An explicit block scope can be useful even inside of another block (whether the outer block is a scope or not).

```
//global scope - 1

//function sortNamesByLength identifier - 1 , parameter names identifier - 2
function sortNamesByLength(names) {
  //function scope - 2

  var buckets = []; //buckets identifier - 3

  for (let firstName of names) {
    //firstName identifier - 4
    //for scope - 3
    if (buckets[firstName.length] == null) {
      buckets[firstName.length] = [];
    }
    buckets[firstName.length].push(firstName);
  }
  // a block to narrow the scope
  {
    //block scope - 4
    let sortedNames = []; //sortedNames identifier - 5
    for (let bucket of buckets) {
      //bucket identifier - 6
      //for scope - 5
      if (bucket) {
        // sort each bucket alphanumerically
        bucket.sort();
        // append the sorted names to our
        // running list
        sortedNames = [...sortedNames, ...bucket];
      }
    }
    return sortedNames;
  }
}

console.log(
  sortNamesByLength(["Sally", "Suzy", "Frank", "John", "Jennifer", "Scott"])
);
// [ "John", "Suzy", "Frank", "Sally", "Scott", "Jennifer" ]
```

- There are six identifiers declared across five different scopes.

- We split them out into each inner nested scope as appropriate.

- Each variable is defined at the innermost scope possible for the program to operate as desired.

- To avoid over-exposing variables in a higher level scope, we again follow POLE and block-scope it in the inner explicit block scope.

- **var buckets = [];** Why not just use let in that same location? Because var is visually distinct from let and therefore signals clearly, “this variable is function-scoped.”

- **var** has always, signaled “variable that belongs to a whole function.”

- **var** better communicates function-scoped than **let** does, **const** and **let** both communicates block-scoping where var is insufficient.

#### Where To _let_?

- Reserve **var** for (mostly) only a top-level function scope means that most other declarations should use **let**.

- If a declaration belongs in a block scope, use **let**.

- If it belongs in the function scope, use **var**.

- Pretty much always use **let** is the for loop,

### var and parameters are function-scoped, and let/const signal block-scoped declarations.

#### What’s the Catch?

```
try {
    doesntExist();
}
catch (err) {
    console.log(err);
    // ReferenceError: 'doesntExist' is not defined
    // ^^^^ message printed from the caught exception

    let onlyHere = true;
    var outerVariable = true;
}

console.log(outerVariable);     // true
console.log(err);
// ReferenceError: 'err' is not defined
// ^^^^ this is another thrown (uncaught) exception
```

- The err variable declared by the catch clause is block-scoped to that block.

- This catch clause block can hold other block-scoped declarations via let.

- A var declaration inside this block still attaches to the outer function/global scope.

- **catch** clauses declaration is optional; if the declaration is omitted, the catch block is no longer (by default) a scope;

## <a id="FiB"></a> Function Declarations in Blocks (FiB)

We’ve seen now that declarations using let or const are block-scoped, and var declarations are function-scoped. So what about function declarations that appear directly inside blocks? As a feature, this is called “FiB.”

One of the most common use cases for placing a function declaration in a block is to conditionally define a function one way or another (like with an if..else statement) depending on some environment state. For example:

```
if (true) {
  function ask() {
    console.log("Am I called?");
  }
}
if (true) {
  function ask() {
    console.log("Or what about me?");
  }
}
for (let i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
  function ask() {
    console.log("Or is it one of these?");
  }
}
ask();
function ask() {
  console.log("Wait, maybe, it's this one?");
}
```

- This code is confusing

- Avoid conditionally defining functions if at all possible.

- Never place a function declaration directly inside any block

- Always place function declarations anywhere in the top-level scope of a function (or in the global scope).

**FiB is not worth it, and should be avoided.**

## <a id="BlockedOver"></a> Blocked Over

And one of the most important organizational techniques is to ensure that no variable is over-exposed to unnecessary scopes (POLE).
