# Using Closures

1. [See the Closure](#see)
2. [The Closure Lifecycle and Garbage Collection(GC)](#garbageCollection)
3. [An Alternative Perspective](#alternative)
4. [Why Closure?](#why)
5. [Closer to Closure](#closer)

Closure is one of the most important language characteristics ever invented in programming—it underlies major programming paradigms, including Functional Programming (FP), modules, and even a bit of class-oriented design. Getting comfortable with closure is required for mastering JS and effectively leveraging many important design patterns throughout your code.

[Example files...](../Examples/Closure/)

## <a id="see"></a> See the Closure

```
// outer/global scope: RED(1)
function lookupStudent(studentID) {
  // function scope: BLUE(2)
  var students = [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle" },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy" },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank" },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah" },
  ];
  return function greetStudent(greeting) {
    // function scope: GREEN(3)
    var student = students.find((student) =>
    // function scope: ORANGE(4)
    student.id == studentID);
    return `${greeting}, ${student.name}!`;
  };
}
var chosenStudents = [lookupStudent(6), lookupStudent(112)];

// accessing the function's name:
chosenStudents[0].name;
// greetStudent
chosenStudents[0]("Hello");
// Hello, Sarah!
chosenStudents[1]("Howdy");
// Howdy, Frank!
```

While greetStudent(..) does receive a single argument as the parameter named greeting, it also makes **reference** to both **students** and **studentID**, identifiers which come from the enclosing scope of lookupStudent(..). Each of those references from the inner function to the variable in an outer scope is called a **closure**. In academic terms, each instance of greetStudent(..) closes over the outer variables students and studentID.

The fact that the execution of chosenStudents[0]("Hello") works and returns us the message “Hello, Sarah!”, means it was still able to access the students and studentID variables. This is a direct observation of closure!

#### Pointed Closure

- The **student => student.id == studentID** arrow function is creating another scope

- The **student** parameter of the arrow function is ORANGE(4), shadowing the GREEN(3) **student**.

#### Adding Up Closures

```
function adder(num1) {
    return function addTo(num2){
    return num1 + num2; };
}
var add10To = adder(10);
var add42To = adder(42);

add10To(15);    // 25
add42To(9);     // 51
```

Every time the outer adder(..) function runs, a new inner addTo(..) function instance is created, and for each new instance, a new closure. So each inner function instance (labeled add10To(..) and add42To(..) in our program) has its own closure over its own instance of the scope environment from that execution of adder(..).

#### Live Link, Not a Snapshot

Closure is actually a live link, preserving access to the full variable itself. We’re not limited to merely reading a value; the closed-over variable can be updated (re-assigned) as well!

```
function makeCounter() {
  var count = 0;
  return function getCurrent() {
    count = count + 1;
    return count;
  };
}
var hits = makeCounter(); // later
hits(); // 1
// later
hits(); // 2
hits(); // 3
```

- The count variable is closed over by the inner getCurrent() function, which keeps it around instead of it being subjected to GC. The hits() function calls access and update this variable, returning an incrementing count each time.

### Mistake value-oriented instead of variable-oriented example

```
var studentName = "Frank";
var greeting = function hello() {
  // we are closing over `studentName`, // not "Frank"
  console.log(`Hello, ${studentName}!`);
};
// later
studentName = "Suzy";
// later
greeting();
// Hello, Suzy!
```

- Common to mistake closure as value-oriented instead of variable-oriented, developers sometimes get tripped up trying to use closure to snapshot-preserve a value from some moment in time.

#### Common Closures: Ajax and Events

```
function lookupStudentRecord(studentID) {
  ajax(`https://some.api/student/${studentID}`, function onRecord(record) {
    console.log(`${record.name} (${studentID})`);
  });
}
lookupStudentRecord(114);
// Frank (114)
```

- Then studentID still around and accessible to the callback because of Closure.

```
function listenForClicks(btn, label) {
  btn.addEventListener("click", function onClick() {
    console.log(`The ${label} button was clicked!`);
  });
}
var submitBtn = document.getElementById("submit-btn");
listenForClicks(submitBtn, "Checkout");
```

- The label parameter is closed over by the onClick(..) event handler callback. When the button is clicked, label still exists to be used.

#### What If I Can’t See It?

If a closure exists (in a technical, implementation, or academic sense) but it cannot be observed in our programs, does it matter? No.

example, invoking a function that makes use of lexical scope lookup:

```
function say(myName) {
  var greeting = "Hello";
  output();
  function output() {
    console.log(`${greeting}, ${myName}!`);
  }
}
say("Kyle");
// Hello, Kyle!
```

- The inner function output() accesses the variables greeting and myName from its enclosing scope. But the invocation of output() happens in that same scope, where of course greeting and myName are still available; that’s just lexical scope, not closure.

#### Observable Definition

Closure is observed when a function uses variable(s) from outer scope(s) even while running in a scope where those variable(s) wouldn’t be accessible.

- Must be a function involved
- Must reference at least one variable from an outer scope
- Must be invoked in a different branch of the scope chain from the variable(s)

## <a id="garbageCollection"></a> The Closure Lifecycle and Garbage Collection(GC)

- Since closure is inherently tied to a function instance, its closure over a variable lasts as long as there is still a reference to that function.
- Closure can unexpectedly prevent the GC of a variable that you’re otherwise done with, which leads to run-away memory usage over time.
- It’s important to discard function references (and thus their closures) when they’re not needed anymore.

```
function manageBtnClickEvents(btn) {
  var clickHandlers = [];
  return function listener(cb) {
    if (cb) {
      let clickHandler = function onClick(evt) {
        console.log("clicked!");
        cb(evt);
      };
      clickHandlers.push(clickHandler);
      btn.addEventListener("click", clickHandler);
    } else {
      // passing no callback unsubscribes // all click handlers
      for (let handler of clickHandlers) {
        btn.removeEventListener("click", handler);
      }
      clickHandlers = [];
    }
  };
}

// var mySubmitBtn = ..
var onSubmit = manageBtnClickEvents(mySubmitBtn);
onSubmit(function checkout(evt) {
  // handle checkout
});
onSubmit(function trackAction(evt) {
  // log action to analytics
});
// later, unsubscribe all handlers:
onSubmit();
```

In this program, the inner onClick(..) function holds a closure over the passed in cb (the provided event callback). That means the checkout() and trackAction() function expression references are held via closure (and cannot be GC’d) for as long as these event handlers are subscribed.
When we call onSubmit() with no input on the last line, all event handlers are unsubscribed, and the clickHandlers array is emptied. Once all click handler function references are discarded, the closures of cb references to checkout() and trackAction() are discarded.

#### Per Variable or Per Scope?

Conceptually, closure is per variable rather than per scope. Ajax callbacks, event handlers, and all other forms of function closures are typically assumed to close over only what they explicitly reference.

```
function manageStudentGrades(studentRecords) {
  var grades = studentRecords.map(getGrade);

  return addGrade;
  // ************************

  function getGrade(record) {
    return record.grade;
  }
  function sortAndTrimGradesList() {
    // sort by grades, descending
    grades.sort(function desc(g1, g2) {
      return g2 - g1;
    });
    // only keep the top 10 grades
    grades = grades.slice(0, 10);
  }
  function addGrade(newGrade) {
    grades.push(newGrade);
    sortAndTrimGradesList();
    return grades;
  }
}

var addNextGrade = manageStudentGrades([
  { id: 14, name: "Kyle", grade: 86 },
  { id: 73, name: "Suzy", grade: 87 },
  { id: 112, name: "Frank", grade: 75 }, // ..many more records..
  { id: 6, name: "Sarah", grade: 91 },
]);

// later
console.log(addNextGrade(81));
console.log(addNextGrade(68));
// [ .., .., ... ]

```

According to the per variable definition of closure, since getGrade and studentRecords are not referenced by the inner functions, they’re not closed over. They should be freely available for GC right after the manageStudentGrades(..) call completes.

Many modern JS engines do apply an optimization that removes any variables from a closure scope that aren’t explicitly referenced. However, there are situations where such an optimization cannot be applied, and the closure scope continues to contain all its original variables. In other words, closure must be per scope, implementation wise, and then an optional optimization trims down the scope to only what was closed over (a similar outcome as per variable closure).

A fix to the earlier manageStudentGrades(..) example to ensure the potentially large array held in studentRecords is not caught up in a closure scope unnecessarily:

```
function manageStudentGrades(studentRecords) {
  var grades = studentRecords.map(getGrade);

  // unset `studentRecords` to prevent unwanted
  // memory retention in the closure
  studentRecords = null;

  return addGrade;

  // ..
}

// ..
```

- Ensuring that even if stu- dentRecords remains in the closure scope, that variable is no longer referencing the potentially large array of data; the array can be GC’d.

## <a id="alternative"></a> An Alternative Perspective

- Functions are “first-class values” that can be passed around the program, just like any other value.
- Closure is the link-association that connects that function to the scope/variables outside of itself, no matter where that function goes.

Our current perspective suggests that wherever a function is passed and invoked, closure preserves a hidden link back to the original scope to facilitate the access to the closed-over variables.

Alternative model de-emphasizes “functions as first-class values,” and instead embraces how functions (like all non-primitive values) are held by reference in JS, and assigned/passed by reference-copy.

Closure instead describes the magic of keeping alive a function instance, along with its whole scope environment and chain, for as long as there’s at least one reference to that function instance floating around in any other part of the program.

## <a id="why"></a> Why Closure?

By creating a function instance that encapsulates some information inside (via closure), the function-with-stored-in-formation can later be used directly without needing to re-provide that input. This makes that part of the code cleaner,and also offers the opportunity to label partially applied functions with better semantic names.

## <a id="closer"></a> Closer to Closure

- Observational: closure is a function instance remembering its outer variables even as that function is passed to and invoked in other scopes.
- Implementational: closure is a function instance and its scope environment preserved in-place while any references to it are passed around and invoked from other scopes.
- Closure can improve efficiency by allowing a function instance to remember previously determined information instead of having to compute it each time.
- Closure can improve code readability, bounding scope-exposure by encapsulating variable(s) inside function instances, while still making sure the information in those variables is accessible for future use. The resultant narrower, more specialized function instances are cleaner to interact with, since the preserved information doesn’t need to be passed in every invocation.
