# The Module Pattern

1. [Encapsulation and Least Exposure (POLE)](#POLE)
2. [What Is a Module?](#whatIs)
3. [Node CommonJS Modules](#commonJS)
4. [Modern ES Modules(ESM)](#ESM)
5. [Exit Scope](#exit)

## <a id="POLE"></a> Encapsulation and Least Exposure (POLE)

Encapsulation is often cited as a principle of object-oriented (OO) programming, but it’s more fundamental and broadly applicable than that. The goal of encapsulation is the bundling or co-location of information (data) and behavior (functions) that together serve a common purpose.

It’s easier to build and maintain software when we know where things are, with clear and obvious boundaries and connection points. It’s also easier to maintain quality if we avoid the pitfalls of over-exposed data and functionality.

## <a id="whatIs"></a> What Is a Module?

A module is a collection of related data and functions (often referred to as methods in this context), characterized by a division between hidden private details and public accessible details, usually called the “public API.”

#### Namespaces (Stateless Grouping)

If you group a set of related functions together, without data, then you don’t really have the expected encapsulation a module implies. The better term for this grouping of stateless functions is a namespace

```
var Utils = {
  cancelEvt(evt) {
    evt.preventDefault();
    evt.stopPropagation();
    evt.stopImmediatePropagation();
  },
  wait(ms) {
    return new Promise(function c(res) {
      setTimeout(res, ms);
    });
  },
  isValidEmail(email) {
    return /[^@]+@[^@.]+\.[^@.]+/.test(email);
  },
};
```

#### Data Structures (Stateful Grouping)

Even if you bundle data and stateful functions together, if you’re not limiting the visibility of any of it, then you’re stopping short of the POLE aspect of encapsulation; it’s not particularly helpful to label that a module.

```
// data structure, not module
var Student = {
  records: [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle", grade: 86 },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy", grade: 87 },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank", grade: 75 },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah", grade: 91 },
  ],
  getName(studentID) {
    var student = this.records.find((student) => student.id == studentID);
    return student.name;
  },
};
Student.getName(73);
// Suzy
```

- Since records is publicly accessible data, not hidden behind a public API, Student here isn’t really a module.

#### Modules (Stateful Access Control)

To embody the full spirit of the module pattern, we not only need grouping and state, but also access control through visibility (private vs. public).

```
var Student = (function defineStudent() {
  var records = [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle", grade: 86 },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy", grade: 87 },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank", grade: 75 },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah", grade: 91 },
  ];
  var publicAPI = { getName };
  return publicAPI;
  // ************************
  function getName(studentID) {
    var student = records.find((student) => student.id == studentID);
    return student.name;
  }
})();
Student.getName(73); // Suzy
```

- Student is now an instance of a module. It features a public API with a single method: getName(..). This method is able to access the private hidden records data.

- The instance of the module is created by the defineStudent() IIFE being executed.

- Student.getName(..) invokes this exposed inner function, which maintains access to the inner records variable via closure.

- The use of an IIFE implies that our program only ever needs a single central instance of the module, commonly referred to as a “singleton.”

#### Module Factory (Multiple Instances)

```
// factory function, not singleton IIFE
function defineStudent() {
  var records = [
    { id: 14, name: "Kyle", grade: 86 },
    { id: 73, name: "Suzy", grade: 87 },
    { id: 112, name: "Frank", grade: 75 },
    { id: 6, name: "Sarah", grade: 91 },
  ];
  var publicAPI = { getName };
  return publicAPI;
  // ************************
  function getName(studentID) {
    var student = records.find((student) => student.id == studentID);
    return student.name;
  }
}
var fullTime = defineStudent();
fullTime.getName(73);
// Suzy
```

Rather than specifying defineStudent() as an IIFE, we just define it as a normal standalone function, which is commonly referred to in this context as a “module factory” function.

- There must be an outer scope, typically from a module factory function running at least once.
- The module’s inner scope must have at least one piece of hidden information that represents state for the module.
- The module must return on its public API a reference to at least one function that has closure over the hidden module state (so that this state is actually preserved).

## <a id="commonJS"></a> Node CommonJS Modules

CommonJS modules format used by Node are file-based; one module per file.

```
module.exports.getName = getName;
// ************************
var records = [
{ id: 14, name: "Kyle", grade: 86 }, { id: 73, name: "Suzy", grade: 87 }, { id: 112, name: "Frank", grade: 75 }, { id: 6, name: "Sarah", grade: 91 }
];
function getName(studentID) { var student = records.find(
        student => student.id == studentID
    );
return student.name; }

```

- The records and getName identifiers are in the top-level scope of this module, but that’s not the global scop

- To expose something on the public API of a CommonJS module, you add a property to the empty object provided as **module.exports**.

- Is recommend collecting the exports all together, either at the top or bottom of your file.

If you want to assign multiple exports at once, using object literal style definition, you can do this instead:

```
Object.assign(module.exports,{
   // .. exports ..
});
```

What’s happening here is defining the { .. } object literal with your module’s public API specified, and then Object.assign(..) is performing a shallow copy of all those properties onto the existing module.exports object, instead of replacing it This is a nice balance of convenience and safer module behavior.

To include another module instance into your module/pro- gram, use Node’s require(..) method.

```
var Student = require("/path/to/student.js"); Student.getName(73);
// Suzy
```

- CommonJS modules behave as singleton instances, similar to the IIFE module definition style presented before.

## <a id="ESM"></a> Modern ES Modules(ESM)

The ESM format shares several similarities with the CommonJS format.

- ESM is file-based

- And module instances are singletons

- Everything private by default

**One notable difference is that ESM files are assumed to be strict-mode, without needing a "use strict" pragma at the top. There’s no way to define an ESM as non-strict-mode.**

Instead of module.exports in CommonJS, ESM uses an export keyword to expose something on the public API of the module.

```
// ************************
var records = [
  { id: 14, name: "Kyle", grade: 86 },
  { id: 73, name: "Suzy", grade: 87 },
  { id: 112, name: "Frank", grade: 75 },
  { id: 6, name: "Sarah", grade: 91 },
];
export default function getName(studentID) {
  var student = records.find((student) => student.id == studentID);
  return student.name;
}
export { getName };
```

Variation on how the export statements can be specified.

```
export function getName(studentID) { // ..
}

export default function getName(studentID) { // ..
}
```

- A “default export” is a shorthand for consumers of the module when they import.

- Non-default exports are referred to as “named exports.”

The import keyword—like export, it must be used only at the top level of an ESM outside of any blocks or functions—also has a number of variations in syntax.

The first is referred to as “named import”:

```
import { getName } from "/path/to/students.js";
getName(73);   // Suzy

//----------------------------------------------//

import { getName as getStudentName } from "/path/to/students.js";
getStudentName(73); // Suzy


//----------------------------------------------//

import getName from "/path/to/students.js";
getName(73);   // Suzy

//----------------------------------------------//

import { default as getName, /* .. others .. */ } from "/path/to/students.js";
getName(73); // Suzy

//----------------------------------------------//

import * as Student from "/path/to/students.js"; Student.getName(73); // Suzy
```

## <a id="exit"></a> Exit Scope

Whether you use the classic module format (browser or Node), CommonJS format (in Node), or ESM format (browser or Node), modules are one of the most effective ways to structure and organize your program’s functionality and data.

POLE is the defensive private by default posture we always take, making sure we avoid over-exposure and interact only with the minimal public API surface area necessary.

And underneath modules, the magic of how all our module state is maintained is closures leveraging the lexical scope system.
