# What Is JavajScript

1. [What’s With That Name?](#that-name)
2. [Language Specification](#language-specification)
3. [The Web Rules Everything About (JS)](#web-rules)
4. [Many Faces](#many-faces)
5. [Backwards & Forwards](#backwards-forwards)
6. [Jumping the Gaps](#jumping-the-gaps)
7. [Filling the Gaps](#filling-the-gaps)
8. [What’s in an Interpretation?](#interpretation)
9. [Strictly Speaking](#strictly)

## <a id="that-name"></a> What’s With That Name?

The truth is, the name JavaScript is an artifact of marketing shenanigans. When Brendan Eich first conceived of the language, he code-named it Mocha. Internally at Netscape, the brand LiveScript was used. But when it came time to publiclyname the language, “JavaScript” won the vote.

Because this language was originally designed to appeal to an audience of mostly Java programmers, and because the word “script” was popular at the time to refer tolightweight programs. These lightweight “scripts” would be the first ones to embed inside of pages.

There are some superficial resemblances between JavaScript’s code and Java code.Those similarities don’t particularly come from shared development, but from both languages targeting developers with assumed syntax expectations from C.

The official name of the language specified by **TC39** andf ormalized by the **ECMA** standards body is **ECMAScript**.

Whether you call it JavaScript, JS, ECMAScript, or ES2019,it’smost definitely not a variant of the Java language!

_“Java is to JavaScript as ham is to hamster.”_
–Jeremy Keith, 2009

## <a id="language-specification"></a> Language Specification

The TC39 committee is comprised of between 50 and about100 different people from a broad section of web-invested companies, such as browser makers (Mozilla, Google, Apple)and device makers (Samsung, etc).

Their primary task is managing the official specification for the language.

There’s justone JS, the official standard as maintained by TC39 and ECMA.

That means you can learn one JS, and rely on that same JS every where.

## <a id="web-rules"></a> The Web Rules Everything About (JS)

TC39 members often proclaim, “we don’t break the web!”

How JS is implemented for web browsers is, in all practicality, the only reality that matters.

Sometimes the JS specification will dictate some new orrefined behavior, and yet that won’t exactly match withhow it works in browser-based JS engines.

Often TC39 will backtrack and simply choose to conform the specification to the reality of the web.

But occasionally, TC39 will decide the specification shouldstick firm on some point even though it is unlikely thatbrowser-based JS engines will ever conform.

Appendix B, “Additional ECMAScript Featuresfor Web Browsers”. The JS specification includes this appendix to detail out any known mismatches between the official JS specification and the reality of JS on the web. Inother words, these are exceptions that are allowedonlyforweb JS; other JS environments must stick to the letter of the law.

## <a id="many-faces"></a> Many Faces

JavaScript is most definitely a multi-paradigm language. You can write procedural, class-oriented, or FP-style code, and you can make those decisions on a line-by-line basis instead ofbeing forced into an all-or-nothing choice.

- Procedural style organizes code in a top-down, linear progression through a pre-determined set of operations, usually collected together in related units called procedures.
- OO style organizes code by collecting logic and data together into units called classes.
- FP style organizes code into functions (pure computations as opposed to procedures), and the adaptations of those functions as values.

## <a id="backwards-forwards"></a> Backwards & Forwards

JS has **backwards compatibility**, that means that once something is ac-cepted as valid JS, there will not be a future change tothe language that causes that code to become invalid JS. This makes the decision to chooseJS for a program a more wise and safe investment, for years into the future.

_There are some small exceptions to this rule. JS has had somebackwards-incompatible changes, but TC39 is extremely cautious in doing so._

Being **forwards-compatible** means that including a new addition to the language in a program would not cause that program to break if it were run in an older JS engine. **JS is not forwards-compatible**, despite many wishing such, and even incorrectly believing the myth that it is.

## <a id="jumping-the-gaps"></a> Jumping the Gaps

For new and incompatible syntax, the solution is **transpiling**. Typically, forwards-compatibility problems related to syntax are solved by using a transpiler (the most common one being [Babel](https://babeljs.io) ) to convert from that newer JS syntax version to an equivalent older syntax.

**Example**

```
if(something)
{
    let x = 3;
    console.log(x);
} else {
    let x = 4;
    console.log(x);
}
```

The Babel transpiler might convert thatcode to look like this:

```
var x$0, x$1;
if(something)
{
    x$0 = 3;
    console.log(x$0);
} else {
    x$1 = 4;
    console.log(x$1);
}
```

## <a id="filling-the-gaps"></a> Filling the Gaps

If the forwards-compatibility issue is not related to newsyntax, but rather to a missing API method that was only recently added, the most common solution is to provide a definition for that missing API method that stands in and acts as if the older environment had already had it natively defined. This pattern is called a polyfill (aka “shim”).

Transpilers like **Babel** typically detect which polyfills your code needs and provide them automatically for you. But occasionally you may need to include/define them explicitly.

## <a id="interpretation"></a> What’s in an Interpretation?

The real reason it matters to have a clear picture on whether JS is interpreted or compiled relates to the nature of how errors are handled.

Historically, scripted or interpreted languages were executed in generally a top-down and line-by-line fashion; there’s typically not an initial pass through the program to processit before execution begins.

Since JS is compiled, we are informed of static errors (such as malformed syntax) before our code is executed. That is a substantively different interaction model than we get with traditional “scripting” programs, and arguably more helpful!

_JS is a compiled language, meaning the tools (including the JSengine) process and verify a program (reporting any errors!) before it executes._

## <a id="strictly"></a> Strictly Speaking

Back in 2009 with the release of ES5, JS added strict mode as an opt-in mechanism for encouraging better JS programs.

Strict mode should be seeing like a **guide** to the best way to do things so that the JS engine has the best chance of optimizing and efficiently running the code.

Strict mode is switched on per file with a special pragma
(nothing allowed before it except comments/whitespace):

```
// only whitespace and comments are allowed
// before the use-strict pragma
"use strict";
// the rest of the file runs in strict mode
```

Strict mode can alternatively be turned on per-function scope, with exactly the same rules about its surroundings:

```
functionsomeOperations() {
// whitespace and comments are fine here
"use strict";
// all this code will run in strict mode
}
```

**If a file has strict mode turned on, the function-level strict mode pragmas are disallowed.**
