# Surveying JS

1. [Each File is a Program](#each-file)
2. [Values](#values)
3. [Arrays And Objects](#arrays-objectsues)
4. [Declaring and Using Variables](#declaring-variables)
5. [Functions](#functions)
6. [Comparisons](#Comparisons)
7. [How We Organize in JS](#organize-js)

## <a id="each-file"></a> Each File is a Program

The reason this matters is primarily around error handling. Since JS treats files as programs, one file may fail (duringparse/compile or execution) and that will not necessarily prevent the next file from being processed. Obviously, if your application depends on five .js files, and one of them fails, the overall application will probably only partially operate, at best. It’s important to ensure that each file works properly, and that to whatever extent possible, they handle failure inother files as gracefully as possible.

## <a id="values"></a> Values

The most fundamental unit of information in a program is avalue. Values are data. They’re how the program maintains state. Values come in two forms in JS: primitive and object.

- Primitive value String

```
    console.log("My name is ${ firstName }.");
    // My name is ${ firstName }.

	console.log('My name is ${ firstName }.');
	// My name is ${ firstName }.

	console.log(`My name is ${firstName}.`);
	// My name is Kyle.
```

Assuming this program has already defined a variable firstName with the string value "Kyle", the`-delimited stringthen resolves the variable expression (indicated with${ ..}) to its current value. This is called **interpolation**.

- Primitive value Booleans and Numbers

```
	while(false) {
		console.log(3.141592);
	}
```

Another variation on numbers is the bigint (big-integer) primitive type, whichis used for storing arbitrarily large numbers.

- Primitive value null and undefined

```
	while(value!=undefined)
	{
		console.log("Still got something!");
	}
```

While there are differences between them (some historic andsome contemporary), for the most part both values serve the purpose of indicating emptiness (or absence) of a value.

However, it’s safest and best to use only undefined as the single empty value, even though null seems attractive in that it’s shorter to type!

- Primitive value symbol

```
	hitchhikersGuide[ Symbol("meaning of life") ];
	//42
```

Is a special-purpose value that behaves as a hidden unguessable value. Symbols are almost exclusively used as special keys on objects.

- Object value Array

```
	names=["Frank","Kyle","Peter","Susan"];
    names.length; // 4
    names[0];// Frank
    names[1];// Kyle
```

JS arrays can hold any value type, either primitive or object.

- Object value object

```
	name={
        first:"Kyle",
        last:"Simpson",
        age:39,
        specialties:["JS","Table Tennis"]
    };

    console.log(`My name is ${name.first}.`); //My name is Kyle
    console.log(`My name is ${name['first']}.`); //My name is Kyle
```

Objects are more general: an unordered, keyed collection of any various values, access the element by a string location name (aka “key” or “property”).

**Value Type Determination**

```
	typeof 42;                       // "number"
    typeof "abc";                    // "string"
    typeof true;                     // "boolean"
    typeof undefined;                // "undefined"
    typeof null;                     // "object" -- oops, bug!
    typeof {"a":1};                  // "object"
    typeof [1,2,3];                  // "object"
    typeof functionhello(){};        // "function"
```

_typeof null unfortunately returns "object" instead of the expected "null"._
_typeof returns the specific "function" for functions, but not the expected "array" for arrays._

## <a id="declaring-variables"></a> Declaring and Using Variables

[Example files...](../Exercises/Variables/)

Variables have to be declared (created) to be used. Thereare various syntax forms that declare variables (aka, “iden-tifiers”), and each form has different implied behaviors.

The var key word declares a variable to be used in that part of the program, and optionally allows initial value assignment. Similar keyword is let.

**var**, communicates “this variable will be seen by a wider scope”.
**let**, allows a more limited access to the variable than var. This is called **“block scoping”** as opposed to regular or function scoping.
**const**, it must be given a value at the moment it’s declared, and cannot be re-assigned a different value later. Object values can still be changed even though the variable can’t be re-assigned. (**“block scoping”**)

**Block-scoping** is very useful for limiting how widespread variable declarations are in our programs, which helps pre-vent accidental overlap of their names.

Besides var/let/const, there are other syntactic forms that declare identifiers (variables) in various scopes. For example:

```
	function hello(name) {
        console.log(`Hello,${name}.`);
    }

    hello("Kyle");// Hello, Kyle.
```

The identifier hello is created in the outer scope, and it’s also automatically associated so that it references the function.

Another syntax that declares a variable is a catch clause:

```
	try {
        someError();
    }
    catch(err) {
        console.log(err);
    }
```

## <a id="functions"></a> Functions

[Example files...](../Exercises/Functions/)

In JS, we should consider “function” to take the broader meaning of another related term: “procedure.” A procedureis a collection of statements that can be invoked one or more times, may be provided some inputs, and may give back one or more outputs.

**Function declaration**

```
    function awesomeFunction(coolThings)
    {
        // ..
        return amazingStuff;
    }
```

**Function expression**

```
    var awesomeFunction = function(coolThings) {
        // ..
        return amazingStuff;
    };
```

_It’s extremely important to note that in JS, functions are values that can be assigned (as shown in this snippet) and passed around._

_You can only return asingle value, but if you have more values to return, you can wrap them up into a single object/array._

_Since functions are values, they can be assigned as propertieson objects_

## <a id="comparisons"></a> Comparisons

[Example files...](../Exercises/Comparisons/)

Making decisions in programs requires comparing values to determine their identity and relationship to each other. JS has several mechanisms to enable value comparison.

_triple-equals ===_

Described as the “strict equality” operator.

```
    3 === 3.0;              // true
    "yes" === "yes";        // true
    null === null;          // true
    false === false;        // true
    42 === "42";            // false
    "hello" === "Hello";    // false
    true === 1;             // false
    0 === null;             // false
    "" === null;            // false
    null === undefined;     // false
```

Specifically, **===** disallows any sort of type conversion (aka, “coercion”) in its comparison, where other JS comparisons do allow coercion.
The === operator is designed to lie in two cases of special values: NaN and -0.

```
    NaN === NaN; // false
    0 === -0;    // true
```

_For NaN comparisons, use Number.isNaN(..)_
_For -0 comparison, use theObject.is(..)_

You could think of Object.is(..) as the “quadruple-equals” ====

Comparisons of object values (non-primitives)

```
    var x= [1,2,3];
    // assignment is by reference-copy, so
    // y references the *same* array as x,
    // not another copy of it.

    var y = x; y === x; // true
    y===[1,2,3]; // false
    x===[1,2,3]; // false
```

The array structure and contents don’t matter in this comparison, only the **reference identity**.

JS doesn’t provide structural equality comparison because it’s almost intractable to handle all the corner cases!

**Coercive Comparisons**

Coercion means a value of one type being converted to its respective representation in another type (to whatever extent possible).

_The == operator_

Should be described as “coercive equality.”, performs its comparisons without considering the types of its compared values.

```
    42 == "42"; // true
    1 == true;  // true
```

In both comparisons, the value types are different, so the == causes the non-number values ( "42" and true ) to be converted to numbers ( 42 and 1, respectively) before the comparisons are made.

_Operators <,> ( and even <= and >=)_

Just like ==, these operators will perform as if they’re “strict” if the types being relationally compared already match, but they’ll allow coercion first (generally, to numbers) if the types differ.

```
    var arr = ["1", "10", "100", "1000"];
    for (let i = 0; i < arr.length && arr[i] < 500; i++) {
    // will run 3 times
    }
```

These relational operators typically use numeric comparisons,except in the case where both values being compared are already strings; in this case, they use alphabetical (dictionary-like) comparison of the strings:

```
    var x = "10";
    var y = "9";

    x < y; // true, watch out!
```

There’s no way to get these relational operators to avoid coercion, other than to just never use mismatched types in the comparisons.

## <a id="organize-js"></a> How We Organize in JS

[Example files...]('../Exercises/Organize JS/')

**Classes**

The terms “object-oriented” “class-oriented” and “classes” are all very loaded full of detail and nuance; they’re not universal in definition.

A common and somewhat traditional definition will be:
A class in a program is a definition of a “type” of custom data structure that includes both data and behaviors that operate on that data. Classes define how such a data structure works, but classes are not themselves concrete values. To get a concrete value that you can use in the program, a class must be instantiated (with the **new** keyword) one or more times.

**Class Inheritance**

Another aspect inherent to traditional “class-oriented” design, though a bit less commonly used in JS, is “inheritance” (and “polymorphism”).

```
    class Publication {
        constructor(title, author, pubDate) {
            this.title = title;
            this.author = author;
            this.pubDate = pubDate;
        }
        print() {
            console.log(`
            Title:${this.title}
            By:${this.author}
            ${this.pubDate}`);
        }
    }

    class Book extends Publication {
        constructor(bookDetails) {
            super(bookDetails.title, bookDetails.author, bookDetails.publishedOn);
            this.publisher = bookDetails.publisher;
            this.ISBN = bookDetails.ISBN;
        }
        print() {
            super.print();
            console.log(`Publisher:${this.publisher}ISBN:${this.ISBN}`);
        }
    }
```

The fact that inherited and overridden methods can have the same name and co-exist is called polymorphism.
Inheritance is a powerful tool for organizing data/behavior inseparate logical units (classes), but allowing the child class to cooperate with the parent by accessing/using its behavior and data.

**Modules**

The module pattern has essentially the same goal as the class pattern, which is to group data and behavior together into logical units. Also like classes, modules can “include” or “access” the data and behaviors of other modules, for cooperation sake.

_Classic Modules_

The key hallmarks of aclassic module are an outer function (that runs at least once), which returns an “instance” of the module with one or more functions exposed that can operate on the module instance’s internal (hidden) data.

**Class and modules diferences**

The class form stores methods and data on an object instance, which must be accessed with the **this.** prefix. With modules, the methods and data are accessed as identifier variables in scope, without any **this.** prefix.

With class the “API” of an instance is implicit in the class definition—also, all data and methods are public.
With themodule factory function you explicitly create and return an object with any publicly exposed methods, and any data or other unreferenced methods remain private inside the factory function.

-AMD (Asynchronous Module Definition)
-UMD (Universal Module Definition)
-CommonJS (classic Node.js-style modules)

**ES Modules**

ES modules (ESM), introduced to the JS language in ES6, are meant to serve much the same spirit and purpose as the existing classic modules just described, especially taking into account important variations and use cases from AMD, UMD, and CommonJS.

There’s no wrapping function to define a module. The wrapping context is a file. ESMs are always file-based; onefile, one module.
If something is defined in a module but not exported, then it stays hidden (just as with classic modules).

ESMs are, in effect, **“singletons”** in that there’s only one instance ever created, at first importin your program, and all other imports just receive a reference to that same single instance.
